once around iota horologi.
So this star is in the southern
constellation of horologium the clock
and it's a fairly faint star at a
magnitude of 5.4. So only just above the
magic six that is the limit for typical
naked eye observations in good
condition. And Horalogium lies below the
constellation of Eridanis if you're
looking down from the north um and is a
fairly faint constellation in itself.
But this star is fairly nearby. We're
now 56 and a half light years away. So
it's not right in the sun's backyard,
but it is fairly close to us. And that
gives us a good opportunity to make
studies of it.
The other thing that's attractive about
it is that it is fairly similar to the
sun. Class G0V. G0 little bit hotter
than the sun, which is a G2. And V,
well, that V, if you see that on a star
class means that it's a main sequence
star. It's actually the Roman numeral
five.
The temperature 6207 Kelvin. So, a few
hundred° hotter than solve the sun and
121% of its mass, 116% of its diameter,
but 164% of the power output. That 20%
extra mass gives you a big boost in
total power output and raises the
temperature and increases the uh surface
area of the star by making it larger.
And overall that means there's a lot
more energy comes away from the star.
So this is actually an image of the sun
but it's so similar that I used it for
iota horologi.
Main sequence means converting hydrogen
to helium in the core still. And when I
say still this is actually quite a young
star for a star of its class 500 million
years. So that's um nine times less
of the stellar evolution than perhaps uh
the is the case with the sun, but we're
not sure. It could be 300, it could be
900. There's quite a difficulty with
aging these sorts of G-class stars. They
are not very good at bringing to the
surface any of the heavier elements that
they make in the core. And as a result
of that, it's quite difficult to see how
far they've gone in turning hydrogen to
helium in the core. All you have in the
outer layers is really the uh original
helium. So you can work out probably
when they were born based on the typical
composition of the universe at the time
from previous generations of stars. The
oldest stars would be 3/4 hydrogen and
one quarter helium. And the more
recently they've been born, they
probably picked up slightly more helium.
Um, but it's a little bit of a
difficulty in this type of star trying
to figure out the age.
Now, it's possibly an escapee from the
famous Hiadees star cluster. We have a
lovely picture of the Hiades cluster on
the right here with the nearby 47 light
years away I think it is star old the
readyy orange giant that's relatively
near and the rather further away uh
group of stars behind it which make up
the rest of the image there that's the
Hedes star cluster now we think those
are about 625
million years old as a cluster and
open cluster is beginning to break apart
as a result and it's it's about 130
light years away from us for the
cluster. So the star has actually closed
in on us to less than half that distance
now. But the metal content and by metals
the astronomers mean the elements
heavier than helium. All the heavier
elements seem to match the contents of
the star Iota hologan
there which is just a line of sight star
nothing whatever to do with them
but in 2018 it was found that the
lithium content didn't seem to match was
only half as abundant so Maybe that is
telling us that they're not from the
Hiades and orbital modeling of the
trajectory of the star seems to point
somewhere else. So, we're not entirely
sure.
So, the star itself also is rather
peculiar
in that it seems to show a magnetic
sunspot cycle or star spot cycle that
only takes 1.6 years. Our sun soul takes
11 years. And usually this correlates
fairly well with the size of the star
and the rotation speed of the star. And
they go in lock step. The smaller the
star, the slower it rotates and the
longer the sunspot cycle takes. So this
is slightly heavier than the sun, only
by 20%. But this sunspot cycle seems to
be going way too fast. the shortest for
any sunlike star that we know of. Very
strange indeed. But it's possible that
that's a 1.6 year variation on top of a
longer cycle that we've failed to
identify. So there's still work to be
done looking at exactly what's going on
with the star itself.
But one of the most interesting things
about looking at these sunlike stars, of
course, is to look for planets. And in
1999, there was a report of a planet in
an earthlike orbit around the star. And
the year later in 2000, a dust disc was
imaged. And we have the picture of iota
horologi on the right with a
coronagraph. You can see the central
circular region and the four black
spokes of the machinery that's been used
to block out the starlight and the
starlight coming around defracting
around that somewhat. But it's also
indicating that there might well be this
dust disc in the image. And the
consequence of that was that Iota Horogi
was put on the target list for test the
terrestrial
planet finder. And this is out there
looking for um exoplanets around all of
these sorts of stars. In fact, it was
number 69 on the list. So it should well
get some more information on that soon
when those observations are in.
Now what we think we have is a very
large gas giant planet and this actually
comes from data from GIA in data release
three from the GIA spacecraft
showing that there is a 6.2 two Jupiter
mass gas giant planet a super gas giant
in an orbit 308 days just under a year
and 0.96
so essentially 1 AU from the star now 1
AU from this star is going to be
slightly warmer than the Earth is around
the sun because the star is a little bit
hotter and the orbit takes less time
because the star is correspondingly 20%
more massive
And so it all fits with Kepler's laws.
But um maybe this giant uh of a planet
here is not going to be habitable if
it's a super gas giant, but it might
well have a set of moons and one of
those might be a large enough to be a
sort of uh earthlike moon going around
it. A larger planet probably has larger
moons. It may have accumulated from a
denser region. And that all makes sense.
So, it's well worth studying. And the
rings, well, we don't know they're
there. That's just for artistic purposes
in this lovely image. Um, and well, it's
entirely possible, I suppose, but we
just don't have any data. But there has
been some interesting speculation about
IoT horolog.
And that is that it might have a set of
friends orbiting around the star with
it. so-called Earth-sized Trojan
planets. Now, this image is not iota
horolog. We don't have this data yet,
but it's very similar to what we think
might be going on.
This is a system called PDS70 with a
planet PDS70b
imaged with ALMA, the radio telescope
array in uh the desert out there in
Chile. And it has seen a dust disc and a
very large planet going around the
central star. And 60° ahead of the
planet is a second planet locked in the
lrangee point. Clearly looks like a less
massive, less bright object. And it
appears to be at that 60° angle. Um, and
that's where we find Trojan asteroids
leading and trailing Jupiter around
their orbit. And indeed, some of the
other planets have Trojan asteroids
trapped in the Lrangee point. And it may
well be that there is a fairly large
planet here. So, um, PDS70b worth
watching, but we believe there's also
possibly one in co-orbit with Iota
Harold GIB.
orbiting further out around the same
star, we've got a 600day orbit for
another planet going around. Now, this
may not be the uh confirmed detection.
It may well just be an effect of
behavior of the star. And we've seen
that in a number of cases where the
rotation of the star and star spots
moving around on the disk of the star
have fooled us into thinking that we
have planets in periods that are 1, two,
three, five, seven times the uh rotation
period of the star. It can be quite
deceiving. Um, so clearly more to come
from this interesting system when we get
to turn the James Web telescope to it
and uh indeed the results from TESS. So
I think this one's worth watching. And
with that I'll leave it. Thanks very
much for listening to that short once
around Iota Horogi.